Oenator M. Deacon: Looking at child care and the proposal to set up a federal secretariat, as with all cross-jurisdictional issues, there will likely be some stress or tension on the file between the feds and the provinces. What role does your department envision for this proposed federal secretariat?

Ms. Hall: Thank you for the question.

The federal secretariat is intended to enhance the capacity of the federal government to be working with provinces and territories in support of the announcement in Budget 2021. It will enhance the internal capacity, in line with the increase in investment for early learning and child care. As well, it’s intended that the secretariat will support the ministerial table. At the moment, there is an ad hoc ministerial table, for example, and the secretariat will play a role in supporting that table and associated official committees.

I would say provinces and territories also have their own administrative structures in their provincial bureaucracies. They are permitted to use a portion of the federal funding in support of their own administrative costs. They can use up to 10% of the funding that the federal government provides in support of their own administrative costs. It is intended that that would continue under the Canada-wide system.

Senator M. Deacon: Thank you. I will leave that for a moment and come back to CMHC to ask a question that I think is built on about seven questions I’ve heard so far this afternoon connected to the Rapid Housing Initiative.

I want to come back to the idea that there is a clear need in cities for high-density housing construction, but in some areas, municipal councils and developers continue to favour suburban sprawl. While the government has committed a good deal of money for this, what can we do at the federal level to see that the higher-density urban housing that is needed, as we see it, is what is being built?

Ms. Bowers: Thank you for that question. We at CMHC are a big proponent of high-density housing in urban centres. We feel that is good in terms of affordability and also in terms of climate change and green initiatives.

When you look at the programs in the National Housing Strategy, most of the programs are supply-based programs that support the creation of rental housing in our large cities.

With respect to market-based rental housing, we observed several years ago that there had not been sufficient growth of purpose-built rental housing in Canada, and an initiative we called the Rental Construction Financing Initiative has been very successful. It started out as a $2 billion program, and it has grown to in excess of $23 billion in terms of government financing. We’ve had great interest and uptake of this program from commercial developers and non-profits as well.

We feel, as the senator mentioned, NIMBYism, the development process and zoning issues in the cities are often significant barriers to creating greater density. Even though these are all municipal and provincial issues, we feel that CMHC has a role in working with various partners to identify the barriers to housing supply creation and to be a constructive partner in unblocking these barriers.

Senator M. Deacon: Thank you.

[Translation]

Senator Moncion: My first question goes to Ms. Bowers, from the CMHC. It is about the securitization program. Could you tell us what that amount is at the moment?

[English]

Ms. Bowers: I’m sorry, Mr. Chair, I did not catch the name of the program. If I could ask the senator to repeat the question, I would appreciate that.

[Translation]

Senator Moncion: The securitization program.

[English]

Ms. Bowers: With respect to that question regarding securitization, I would like to refer the question to CFO, Lisa Williams.

Ms. Williams: At the end of the first quarter of 2021, our outstanding guarantee for securitization is $479 million.

Senator Moncion: Thank you for that answer. How much of the securitization program that you have contributes or doesn’t contribute to the high volume of transactions on the market right now?

[Translation]

We know that the interest rates provided by CMHC are much lower than the conventional rates provided by financial institutions. It’s a kind of stress test, trying to make loans to buyers at a certain rate of interest so that they become part of CMHC’s mortgage lending and eventually end up on the mortgage market.

To what extent is that contributing to the growth in the mortgage market in Canada at the moment?

[English]

Ms. Bowers: Thank you very much for that question, senator. With respect to our securitization programs, the purpose of the program is to provide stable, low-cost funding to financial institutions so that regardless of where you live in Canada, you have access to housing finance. Having said that, we are very conscious of the fact that if the pricing that we place on securitization is too low, it can actually contribute to people being able to access mortgages too readily. That is a risk we’re conscious of.

When you look at the history of pricing for our securitization product over the last five years, you will see that every year we have increased the pricing. We want to create some availability to the programs, but we are conscious that there has to be limits in terms of controlling the amount that is available to financial institutions, because we’re aware of the risks that exist from an economic perspective. That’s something we balance, the need to provide access to financing but at a cost that is reasonable and doesn’t create increased risk for the government and the economy as a whole.

Senator Moncion: Thank you. Could you tell us the maximum amount that you will be allowed to work with under this program?

Ms. Bowers: Perhaps I could ask our CFO to answer that question. We set annual limits on that, and she may have access to those numbers.

Ms. Williams: Yes. I believe the limit is $750 billion for securitization in the current years, and that limit was increased as a result of the pandemic. I’m searching for the date, but in a couple of years’ time, we will come back to our original limit of $600 billion.

Senator Moncion: I will ask the question again, then.

[Translation]

My next question is about early childhood education and daycare places.

We have heard testimony from Ms. Hall, who appeared before the social affairs committee and answered our questions extremely well. She is really familiar with her area.

In terms of the eligibility criteria for daycare places, we know that, in Quebec, not everyone has access to daycare at $7. How will those daycare places be assigned? After all, the program was created to assist women living in poverty or with no possibility of returning to the workforce. Could you tell me about the eligibility criteria and the program’s standards for ensuring that the groups in most need are served first, not the families that have the means to pay for daycare costs.

Ms. Hall: Thank you for the question.

[English]

That is a big question, and thank you for it.

I would say a couple of things. First, we are certainly aware of the lessons from Quebec and that it is important to be mindful of those who benefit from the program and the quality of the program.

So moving forward, we will be in negotiations with provinces and territories. In fact [Technical difficulties] at this point in time.

So we will be working very soon with the provinces and territories to ensure that the programs that they create with the federal funding do provide meaningful and wide access to the programs, including for families living in low income, Black and racialized families, Indigenous families, official language minority communities and others to ensure access is wide and there is a broad benefit from the programs that are available for families and for children.

Senator Moncion: If I understand correctly, you don’t have any criteria or targets that are identified for women or for low-income families or even targets for families who can afford child care?

Ms. Hall: I would say the government did articulate some goals in Budget 2021 that include that child care would be available for all families that need it. That really does speak to very broad access and availability.

The budget also recognized the impact of child care for employment for women or for secondary earners in families and laid out the economic impact that the investment in child care is expected to make. The budget cited a range of studies that suggested the impact of every dollar invested in child care ranges from about $1.50 to $2.80 in terms of the broader economic impact. It also outlined a projection and estimate of GDP growth of 1.2% resulting from this investment. In large part, that’s due to increased revenues and economic activities stemming from women either joining the labour market or being able to work more at jobs they have.

Senator Moncion: Thank you very much.

The Chair: Honourable senators, looking at the clock, we have approximately 10 minutes left for the second round. If officials cannot answer in the time provided, we will ask you to send the answers to us in writing, please, on or before June 11.

Senator Marshall: My question is for CMHC with regard to the Canada Emergency Commercial Rent Assistance Program. I thought that program was finished and it had moved over to the Canada Revenue Agency. I was surprised when I saw the $15.8 million. Can you just explain that? Is this a winding down of the program?

Ms. Bowers: The senator is absolutely correct. It is for the winding down of the program. Q&A activities are conducted to ensure proper governance in the use of funds, and the funds requested are to pay for those activities.

Senator Marshall: Would that be for businesses that didn’t receive their subsidy?

Ms. Bowers: No. They are costs that would be required by our administrator to make sure that the checks and balances and other processes we have in place to ensure that the program has been run properly and that people have received the funds that were allocated and all those governance processes had been completed in the appropriate manner.

Senator Marshall: It is like a post-review. Thank you.

[Translation]

Senator Forest: Thank you very much. My question goes to Ms. Robertson, to whom I also send sincere congratulations.

You are allocating an envelope of $5 million over two years for a huge consultation. Can you explain to us why that consultation will take two years? A lot of consultation has already been done on the matter. Will it just be about self-employed workers? Or will there be much broader consultation on the entire employment insurance program, especially in regions like ours, where seasonal industries like agriculture, fishery and forestry are very important for our residents?

[English]

Ms. Robertson: Thank you so much for the question. Mr. Chair, I would like to redirect again to my colleague Elisha Ram.

The Chair: Mr. Ram, you can send it in writing or answer this in the next 40 seconds, please.

Mr. Ram: Thank you for the question, honourable senator. I can tell you that the consultations are going to be broad. They’re going to go considerably beyond just the issue of self-employed and will include issues like seasonal work, access and adequacy and other issues that touch the EI program. Because of the complexity and the range of issues that we would like to consult, it will explain why it will be a multi-stage process that will take up to two years.

Senator Klyne: This question is for ESDC. With regard to Budget 2021, the government is looking to connect up to 90,000 Canadians with training they need to access good jobs in sectors where employers are looking for skilled workers. In Supplementary Estimates (A), ESDC is spending $332 million for a comprehensive training strategy to drive recovery. I wonder if those two are connected. Regardless of whether they are or not, is the $332 million — has the government considered the disproportional impact the pandemic has had on employment prospects for women and visible minorities? Are any of these funds focused on Indigenous communities, such as those in the tourism industry, to gain greater access to other skilled labour markets?

Ms. Robertson: Thank you, Senator Klyne. I will go to Rachel Wernick who is running this important program. I’m not sure if she can answer in 40 seconds. That was a very loaded question.

Ms. Wernick: I think there is a reference to several programs there in terms of the question.

The Chair: Can you respond in writing?

Ms. Wernick: I think that would do better justice to the senator’s question. Thank you.

The Chair: That would give us due diligence. Thank you.

Senator Loffreda: I’d like to refocus again on homelessness, which is becoming more and more of a concern in this pandemic. My question is for Employment and Social Development Canada.

In your departmental plan, you will be requiring communities to publicly report on progress made in preventing and reducing homelessness, beginning in fiscal year 2021-22. Can you speak to us about this reporting obligation? How do you define “community?” In other words, who has the reporting authority? I imagine communities already have proactively reported on homelessness, but do you expect some communities to have reporting challenges? I always say what you measure improves. What is the trend? Do you have any historical records? It’s a welcome requirement. Thank you.

Ms. Robertson: Would you like us to reply in writing, Mr. Chair, or would you like my colleague Janet Goulding to try to answer in a very short period of time?

Senator Loffreda: In writing is fine. If you have one sentence quickly. Is this new? Are there any trends? And the rest you can do in writing.

Ms. Goulding: I can say that the communities that report are the 64 designated communities that are part of the program. So we can submit that in writing to the committee. The first committee reports are expected later this summer.

[Translation]

Senator Dagenais: I have a very quick question. I would be fine with a written answer. What are the obstacles to the rapid housing initiative? Is it cities making land available? Is it provincial government regulations? Or is it that some dissenting groups don’t want affordable housing in their neighbourhoods?

Could there be a lack of resources in your organization? I would be very grateful if you can send me the answer in writing.

The Chair: Thank you very much, Senator Dagenais.

[English]

Honourable senators, as we conclude this meeting, to the witnesses, thank you very much. You have been very informative and professional. To Ms. Bowers and Ms. Robertson, we have certainly seen great leadership from both of you in this committee. There’s no doubt in my mind that we will be asking you to come back.

That said, honourable senators, our next meeting is on Tuesday, June 15, at 9:30 a.m. EST. I declare the meeting adjourned.

(The committee adjourned.)